President Kalam reminisces
Twenty-five years ago, on July 18, 1980, India joined the space club with the successful flight of the 22-metre-tall, 17-tonne Satellite Launch Vehicle - 3. In an interview, President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, who was the SLV-3 project director, looks back at the successes of India's space programme and presents a wish-list for the future.
Updated - September 23, 2017 12:50 pm IST

T.S. Subramanian
Aim for the moon. That's what President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam wants ISRO to do.
Aim for the moon. That's what President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam wants ISRO to do.

Some years ago, at a meeting of the Madras Institute of Technology (MIT) Alumni Association, you said that as an engineering student there "it was a joy to study the structure of an aircraft." How did you get interested in aircraft and rocketry?

It all started when I was a 10-year-old boy. I was studying in the fifth class at the Rameswaram Panchayat Elementary School. We had a teacher. His name was Sivasubramania Iyer. He used to teach geography, science and hygiene. One day, he was teaching us how birds flew. He drew a diagram on the blackboard, depicting the wings, the tail and the body structure with the head. He explained how birds created the lift and flew. He also explained to us how birds changed direction while flying. Many of us did not understand it. I said I did not.

Our teacher said he would take all of us to the seashore. That evening, the whole class was at the seashore at Rameswaram. He showed how the seabirds flew, how the seagulls flew. He indicated to us what the birds did to flap their wings and what their tails did. He explained to us all those things. The way Sivasubramania Iyer explained, I understood it. But the important thing was from that day he injected into me the dream of something to do with flight. I did not know flight science. But he definitely injected into me how to dream, to have a dream, to fly high, and secondly, to do something later with the science of flight ... the seeding. That is how it started.

As the SLV-3 Project Director, you were the architect of that successful mission. That flight propelled India into the exclusive space club as its seventh member. From then to the present day, with the development of the GSLV-Mk III progressing well and the Chandrayaan mission to the moon slated to take place in 2008, do you think the Indian space programme has progressed well? What direction would you want ISRO to take?

Fortunately, Prof. Vikram Sarabhai gave a mission in the 1960s on what ISRO should do. He gave us a vision — that ISRO should design, develop and launch its own rockets, that is, satellite launch vehicles. It should launch communication satellites in geosynchronous orbits and remote-sensing satellites in polar sun-synchronous orbits. Both were needed for applications — to connect people through communication satellites, provide beneficial information to the people, and bring about connectivity State to State, and country to country. Remote-sensing spacecraft are intended to sense, to discover some of the natural wealth, forest wealth, and help in assessing the drought and flood condition.

In the 1960s, Prof. Sarabhai visualised how important communication and remote-sensing satellites were for applications — for national requirements. The vision he gave us for building launch vehicles and spacecraft — these two activated the whole ISRO programme. I can say that ISRO has successfully completed Prof. Vikram Sarabhai's dream. What next?

I have visited the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre at Thiruvananthapuram a number of times and various other ISRO centres [after becoming the President]. It is time now to have a vision for another 15 years for our space programme. Fortunately, they are now having the Chandrayaan programme; that is, orbiting a spacecraft around the moon. This is one of the directions. Then they will have to carry heavy payloads for communication and remote-sensing satellites. The vision can have three aspects. One is the type of re-usable launchers we should build; that is, single-stage ones up to the orbit. These re-usable rockets will come back after putting the satellites in orbit. One such reusable system is called hyperplane with 100 takeoffs and 100 landings. ISRO has always excelled in high performance missions.

Hyperplane is your pet project.

The idea of a hyperplane is that many satellite launch vehicles in the world — whether they are Ariane or the Russian vehicles or our own GSLVs [Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle] — have a maximum of three to five per cent payload fraction capability in orbit. That is, if they weigh 100 tonnes during lift-off and launching, they will put three to five tonnes in low-earth orbit. But to meet the future demand — so that the cost of the satellites will come down and the cost of the heavier payloads taking to orbit will come down — you need a hyperplane, a reusable launcher. India's pioneering work in the field of hyperplane is the result of innovative thoughts of Air Commodore (retired) R. Gopalaswami. ISRO is already working in the area of reusable launchers. They are deciding whether to have single-stage or two-stage rocket systems.

My suggestion is that we go directly for the single-stage system to the orbit. That means we must develop a hyperplane type of system. This hyperplane is normally a self-contained system. It does not carry the oxidiser. It collects the air from the atmosphere and carries only the fuel. That is how it becomes lighter and its energy will also be higher because it has supersonic propulsion.

Answering your question, the first direction is the re-usable type of launcher system of the hyperplane type. The second one is, apart from sending heavier payloads for requirements such as communication and remote-sensing satellites, we should have missions, we should plan industry for other planets.

For the next 50 years, our vision should be to create a hyperplane, manned flights and the development of a propulsion system that can take us from the existing 10 km a second velocity to a many-times-higher regime. We should have collaborative programmes for the exploration of other planets such as Mars and also the moon.

Why other planets?

In Antarctica, India has the Maitri station. Many nations have got stations there. The idea is that we want to establish our presence there. Antarctica is a continent and it does not belong to just one country. It is the property of humanity.

Similarly, Mars and the moon have a tremendous commercial potential. There is a possibility that Mars may become a human habitat in another three to five decades. This is based on various scientific research. The moon has a lot of He3 [helium] material and also certain type of minerals. All over the world and we in India are using fossil material. Out of fossil material, we get fuel — oil, gas and coal. But the fossil material — the hydrocarbons — are not a renewable source of energy... A situation will arise on the earth — our planet — when there will be a shortage of fuel- coal and oil.

The moon, however, has a large amount of helium. One can generate a large amount of fusion-type energy from helium. We have to develop complex fusion technology to use He3. It has tremendous potential. We can also use the moon's atmosphere to create new chemicals, certain types of pharma products, and many unique industrial products.

What we can do is that the moon would be an intermediate platform, an industrial platform to Mars. Mars will be a habitat. It looks to me that the earth, the moon and Mars will have a tremendous potential for an integrated human civilisation in the next three to five decades.

You were also the Project Director of the very first SLV-3 flight on August 10, 1979, from Sriharikota which, however, failed. Before the mission failed, you had met three personal tragedies — the death of your brother-in-law, father and mother. How did you not allow your personal tragedies to come in the way of that mission?

I want to tell you two things. I was brought up in a joint family system at Rameswaram. In a joint family, when a problem arises, there are many elders to share that problem and lighten the burden. My father lived till he was 103 and my mother till 95. They had given me the spiritual strength to bear any loss. This is very important. In a nuclear family, if there is a problem, it becomes a tragedy. In a joint family system, any problem gets defused. This spiritual strength is what I got from the joint family system, particularly from my father.

The second point is, in 1972, both Prof. Satish Dhawan and Prof. Brahm Prakash called me. Dhawan said, "I am going to give you a very important project. You will be the Project Leader or Project Director for the first SLV-3. I will give you the required budget. We must do it in seven years. All manpower will be available to you from the organisation — from all the centres. We will all work together. Even the Chairman will work for the programme ... It is a very important programme."



As SLV-3 project director he shows Prof. Yashpal, P.N. Haksar, and Satish Dhavan around the integration facility at the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre in Thiruvananthapuram in the late 1970s

I was surprised that he selected me for this type of a task because many senior scientists were there. When he selected me, I felt a big responsibility. "How am I going to do it?" I had a lot of hesitation. Then Prof. Dhawan gave me a piece of advice. I still remember it. "Kalam," he said, "if one does not do anything, he does not experience any problem. But if you do any mission, any task, problems will arise. That problem should not become your master. You should become the master of the problem, defeat that problem and succeed."

As SLV-3 project director he shows Prof. Yashpal, P.N. Haksar, and Satish Dhavan around the integration facility at the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre in Thiruvananthapuram in the late 1970s.

This advice, this doctrine which he propounded in combination with the spiritual strength that my family gave me in the joint family system, helped me come out of the failure we experienced in the first flight. The most important thing is that we were in a position to locate how the failure occurred. M.R. Kurup was the Chairman of the Failure Analysis Board. The present ISRO Chairman, G. Madhavan Nair, was its member-secretary. He was working with me as one of the project chiefs for the SLV-3. Kurup interviewed more than 125 scientists and staff [about the failure]. He analysed over 200 data records.

Kurup and Nair reviewed many of the recommendations of deviation boards and came out with a report within three months of the event. They could technically pinpoint the failure of the airconditioning plant, which led to dust entering the valve system of the control power plant, resulting in its improper functioning. With the precision diagnosis of the failure, we understood that it was a quality problem and we ensured that all our systems went through rigorous checks. At the same time, I ensured through constant visits to work centres that the motivation of the scientists was maintained at the highest level at all times. These two actions enabled us to go for the next launch within one year and succeed.

You and the Russian missile specialist H. Yefremov were the architects of the inter-Governmental Agreement between India and Russia on the joint production of BrahMos, the supersonic cruise missile. BrahMos has scored ten out of ten and it has gone into production for the Navy. Can the same success story be replicated by India and Russia for any other missile?

What we learnt in the whole exercise was that the best minds of the two countries were working together. The design experience, the development experience, the flight experience — all experiences got integrated and mutually shared to get a win-win partnership. Today we have a missile system whose equivalent does not exist in any other country. It is now ready not only for use by India and Russia but also as an export product. This experience is unique for both the countries.

Will you advocate similar joint cooperation for any other missile?

India today has the capability of building various types of missiles. BrahMos is a supersonic cruise missile. So what Dr. Sivathanu Pillai and his team, and the DRDO (Defence Research and Development Organisation) are doing is unique. Its variants will definitely emerge from the cooperation between India and Russia. Similar ventures will emerge because this is a model joint venture.

For the first time, mathematicians and computer engineers at the Society for Electronic Transactions and Security (SETS), Chennai, have come up with a robust and secure communication system for civilian applications, using the same "uncrackable" codes and ciphers that the Defence Services are using. SETS is your brainchild. How do you assess this achievement?

I shall call it secure communication system. SETS' team developed it. SETS comes under the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India. Initially, I was involved. But the whole work was done by SETS, the ECIL and some of the mathematicians. The system was reviewed by the multi-Department Review Committee. This is one of the strengths of the robust communication system. They found the system to be robust and secure. The present system is capable of providing security — this is important — for point-to-point communication, such as Delhi to Bangalore. As a next step, they will have to work for the development of a point-to-multi-point and multi-point-to-multi-point robust and secure information system. That is the future. This is possible and very talented groups are working on it. It is not only for defence; it is mostly used in commerce, particularly in the banking system.

You often talk about igniting the minds of the youth to dream. Did your dreams, thoughts and resultant actions help you in becoming President?

Three things happened. In the 1960s, wheat had to come from the U.S. If it did not come, there would be a famine. We had two visionaries then — one was a politician and the other was a scientist. C. Subramaniam, who was Food Minister, and Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, the agriculture scientist, decided in the 1960s that we should become self-sufficient in food. Today, we produce about 200 million tonnes of food. Just a thought — a vision — that we must become self-sufficient in food led to this.

The second thing happened when Prof. Vikram Sarabhai put forth the idea that India should design, develop, and build a satellite launch vehicle to put communication, remote-sensing and meteorological satellites in orbit. In the 1960s, this was not even on the drawing boards for many of the systems. However, today, we can build any type of rocket system and we can launch any type of spacecraft.

The third thing is that we can build the first supersonic cruise missile. It was an idea. Supersonic cruise missiles were not there in the world. When two people from India and Russia met to think, they had a vision and it happened.

You are passionate about India becoming a strong, developed, and advanced country. What are the areas it should concentrate on?

Our GDP (gross domestic product) is six per cent. It has to grow to 10 per cent. For a decade, we have to work for 10 per cent growth. Then only 260 million people below the poverty line can be lifted up. That means, develop GDP before 2020. How do you do that?

Areas have been identified: agriculture, food processing, education, and health care; information and communication technology; infrastructure development, PURA (Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas), water management, quality power and transportation; and self-reliance in critical technologies.

We need self-reliance in critical technologies because when the nation became a nuclear weapon state in 1998, there were tremendous economic and technological sanctions from many countries. We should not get into such type of problems. So self-reliance in critical technologies is needed. Here, critical technologies mean MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical systems), nano-technology, hydrogen fuel, and laser technology.

You headed the SLV-3 teams in 1979 and 1980. Our satellites are application-oriented...

In satellite launch vehicles, we definitely started with a design capability. SLV-3 was our first programme. Three things happened. Number one was the design capability. We can design, develop, and deploy our own satellite launch vehicles. That was established. We knew how to do failure analysis and post-flight analysis.

The second is manpower — unique manpower in the launch vehicle area and the project management area were created. And it continues.

The third one is that people are not afraid of taking up big missions — to go all the way. We can do it. That type of power, strength, has arisen. That is how you could see the first-generation launch vehicle, the SLV-3. Today, ISRO has second and third generation vehicles. It is readying for the fourth-generation vehicles.

How do you reconcile your contributing to the constructive applications of space science such as remote-sensing and communication with the destructive applications of missiles?

I worked in ISRO for 20 years. It had something to do with applications — putting satellites in orbit. You can call it a peaceful ISRO mission. When I went to the DRDO, the mission there was the missile programme. I wouldn't say the missile programme is for destruction. I can say that missiles also give strength to the nation. Moreover, there are many spin-off products that have come [from missile technology) for societal needs. Missile technology can remove pain also through applications in FROs and cardiac stent. Possessing of missile technology strength gives the nation the strength required to have peace. Then only we can concentrate on economic development. Both economic and military strength make the nation strong in thinking and action.

(This article was >published in The Hindu on July 28, 2005.)